---
layout: post
published: false
title: "This time, it will be different!"
intro: >-
  This post was inspired by Gerald Weinberg's book "The Secrets of Consulting"
  and his observation that "nothing new ever works."
---

We've all been there: the old system has too many shortcomings and is too costly
to maintain so we will build a new, better replacement from the ground up.

Promises are made to justify the cost and investment: "this will solve X, Y, and
Z," "it will be more reliable," and "we won't spend as much time maintaining
it." And my favorite: "the last time didn't go so great, but this time it will
be different!"

Hope induces over-confidence and over-optimism. The result is to throw caution
to the wind, making change even riskier than it already is.

Luckily, there are strategies to manage and reduce risk so that change becomes
possible and less expensive.

## The safest and cheapest change of all is no change

There is wisdom in the saying "If it ain't broke, don't fix it."

A rule of thumb to assess whether a particular change is necessary is simply
asking "why?"

For change to be necessary, the reason must be about a high-impact issue
(system's instability/rigidity, chronic failure, high staff turnover,
competitive threat) rather than about yielding a marginal improvement or about
trends ("everyone else is doing it").

The specifics depend on each organization, asking whether the change is
necessary at all is the first step that is often overlooked.

## Improving the chance of success by embracing failure

Some changes fail, and this is inevitable. We can't predict which will fail, but
as long as we accept that failure is a possible outcome then we can take steps
to reduce the occurrence of failure and mitigate its consequences.

## Big changes are riskier than smaller ones

Ripping everything out and replacing it wholesale is hard, but smaller changes
are easier. Changing only one thing at a time is more manageable, and ensures
changes stay small.

We can leverage this to our advantage by finding "seams" in the system we want
to change.

These seams are the places where we could make a cut, add a small change, and
stitch it all back together without having changed the whole system all at once.

Changes can be decomposed into discrete steps to be implemented gradually, after
establishing that the previous step didn't cause instability to the overall
system.

For instance, if we want to upgrade Point of Sale equipment in a store, we will
drastically reduce risk by replacing only one terminal at a time. If it fails,
business can still go on because every other terminal is still working as usual.

## Plan for rollbacks

When one of the discrete steps turns out to be problematic, it's only a real
problem if we aren't able to roll the system back to its previous state, before
the problem was introduced.

Building the new system alongside the existing one, and ensuring both can
operate alongside for some time ensures we aren't closing any doors as we
progress through the plan.

If something goes wrong, the ability to revert the change quickly and
effortlessly is crucial to minimize the impact.

Organizations that have hard "points of no return" as part of rolling out
mission-critical changes invest considerable resources to ensure the change is
highly likely to work out. This is an option, albeit a very expensive one that
very few organizations can afford. For all others without such a considerable
budget, avoiding points of no return is much more realistic and cost-effective.

## Have backups and redundancies

Data should be backed up as part of the rollback strategy, but backups could
also mean having redundant equipment or resources on standby.

For instance, if your organization is switching over to a new, electric delivery
vehicle to replace its (polluting but tried and true) internal combustion ones,
it could make sense to hire extra drivers temporarily and have them on standby
with the older delivery vehicles, ready to go and take over if the new ones
fail.

Meeting the broken down delivery vehicle and reloading its cargo onto the backup
vehicle will take some time and delay deliveries, but only by a few hours rather
than for days while the new vehicle is out of commission.

Once the major issues have been ironed out, it won't be necessary to have so
much redundancy anymore; the organization doesn't commit to these costs beyond
the initial phases.

## Try the change out on a small cohort first

Users fall on a spectrum from innovators to laggards, according to the
[technology adoption life
cycle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_adoption_life_cycle).

An organization can use this to its advantage by recruiting innovators and early
adopters to try out the new change (with the appropriate warnings) while keeping
the majority of users on the current version.

This gives a chance to try out the change, iron out the kinks, train internal
people on the new version, and get feedback from users on the planned changes.

If anything goes wrong, it will only affect the small proportion of users who
volunteered to try the change. With a rollback plan in place, it is no problem
to revert these users to the current system.

[Feature flags](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feature_toggle) are an elegant way
to implement this idea in software.

## Slack and redundancy are an investment, not a waste

Any organization needs slack, doubly so if it's planning changes.

Having people 100% busy looks good on projections and budgets, but it means
there is no spare capacity available for handling unscheduled work. It also
means that rushing becomes a necessity, which means cutting corners, which means
that failure is both more likely and with larger consequences.

It is insidious because not having any slack appears to work when observed from
a distance. Until it doesn't anymore.

Reducing or eliminating slack might save money in the short term but it puts
your organization several steps closer to failure and its associated costs (both
reputational and financial). It can also increase stress on employees,
increasing absenteeism and turnover.

A recent and current example is the semi-conductors crisis: there was no slack
in supply chains and the result is that companies are struggling to produce
enough to meet demand. Producing just in time saved money while it worked, but
the costs of its failure are very apparent now, compounded with the likely
economical downturn we're entering.

## Pick the right time

Every business has a quieter season or month where business is slower,
organizations should pick this time to introduce new changes.

People within the organization will have more slack time to tackle any issues
that come up, and they'll be less likely to compound mistakes as there will be
less stress.

## Conclusion

Change is scary, costly, and failure-prone. Although failure can't be avoided
every time, organizations have some control to drastically lower the inherent
risk and magnitude. Using the strategies above, it is possible to implement
change in a steadier, more confident, less stressful, and deliberate way.
