---
layout: post
published: true
slug: sysfail
title: "Low quality is a failure of the system, not the individuals"
intro: >-
  Most organizations have some sort of system in place for making software. It's
  been tweaked over the years, maybe even designed by expensive consultants with
  the assurance that it will produce the results the organization wants. Everyone
  is expected to follow the system so that consistency is achieved and people's
  performance can be assessed fairly and accurately. So why are so many
  organizations struggling with delivering software late, and with too many
  defects despite having quality as an OKR?
---

# The red bead experiment

This experiment was originally devised by [Dr. W. Edwards
Deming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._Edwards_Deming) to illustrate how the
system is responsible for variation, rather than the people following it. Here
is a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckBfbvOXDvU) demonstrating it
(albeit with poor audio. If you find it hard to understand, see [this
one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oMb_UKYHvto) instead).

I recommend watching either video but if you can't, here is a summary: a
company is making white/blue beads (depending on which video you watched) from
a mix of white/blue and red beads. Workers are taught a specific and detailed
way of scooping 50 beads from the mix and aren't allowed to deviate from the
system. An inspector then counts the number of red beads in the scoop, and
anything above an arbitrary number is deemed unsatisfactory. As time goes by,
the company is struggling with quality issues from having too many red beads.
To try and improve things, the company introduces incentives like firing the
worst performers, bonuses for the best performers, company swag and posters
encouraging everyone to meet the quality objective, etc. As quality doesn't
improve and there are still too many red beads in most batches, the company
eventually goes bankrupt.

As an outside observer, it's rather obvious that the outcome is 100% determined
by the system and not by workers' skills. The overall number of red beads in
the scoops will be a direct factor of the ratio of red beads in the original
mix. And yet, management believes the workers are the main driver which it
tries to influence with various coercive and encouragement techniques. As
absurd as it looks, most organizations still work in this way: they devise a
system that pretty much guarantees failure and waste. Workers are aware of it
but aren't allowed to speak up or make suggestions, so they simply endure it
for a few years until they move on while the organization loses customers and
money from the waste.

# There is a better way

Everyone wants to feel proud of their work and is striving to do their best at
the tasks they're hired to do. But this is not enough on its own. Given enough
time within a broken system, individuals will lose their drive.

Below are some ways to build a better system where everyone is empowered to
improve quality.

## Psychological safety

Sharing ideas, suggestions, feelings, and thoughts within a team carries a
level of risk for the individual. Psychological safety means team members can
take these risks without worrying about being shamed, blamed, or punished by
the rest of the team or by the organization.

Teams and organizations with low psychological safety are instead encouraging
people to keep their ideas and thoughts to themselves, thus narrowing the pool
of shared information and missing out on ideas that could improve the system.

## Blameless postmortems

Let me preface this by saying no postmortem is ever truly blameless. It's human
nature to try and blame things on someone or something as a way to discharge
our anger[^0].

That being said, postmortems are a powerful tool for understanding what went
wrong, and how to prevent it from going wrong the same way next time. But,
without psychological safety, postmortems are an exercise in blaming the
incident on someone rather than understanding what happened.

Although most resources on postmortems talk about blameless postmortems without
acknowledging the fact that humans are hard-wired to blame, they're still a
good starting point for organizations to build their process. You could do
worse than start with PagerDuty's guide on the topic[^1] for instance.

## Fast, cheap, good; choose two

If the organization is striving for fast and cheap, something has to give. And
that thing is quality. It sometimes makes sense to trade quality off, but I
have very rarely seen it done right.

Not taking enough time to do things properly means that quality will suffer,
making the "fast and cheap" solution very slow and expensive in the long run.

## Quality comes from the top

As seen in the red bead experiment, quality is determined by the system rather
than the people working within the system. Management owns the system, which
makes management responsible for quality issues that arise from it.

To improve quality, it is the system that must change: a well-designed system
will result in improvements. Imagine how much the ratio of red beads would have
changed if the red beads were picked off before scooping. Alas, management
didn't allow any suggestions (let alone changes) in the system, so nothing
improved and the business eventually failed.

## Kaizen

In a nutshell, Kaizen is continuous improvement. Whenever anyone (especially
the individuals doing the job) can think of an improvement for process or
tools, they should be free to pursue it and iterate on the solution.

Adding these little improvements up will result in less waste, yielding even
more time and resources to come up with more improvements. And before long,
quality will go up, people within the organization will feel better about their
work, and customers will notice the quality uptick.

# Quality is deliberate, not expensive.

Think about it this way: an organization can spend most of its budget on waste
from quality issues, or on quality improvements each year. The first kind of
organization will be challenged to stay still, let alone grow. The second kind
will reap the compounded benefits from less waste and can either become more
profitable, grow, or both.

Employees and customers know which kind of organization they're dealing with
and will pick accordingly. The only thing more expensive than
quality is the lack thereof.

[^0]: [Long version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXSjc-pbXk4), [short version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RZWf2_2L2v8)
[^1]: [https://postmortems.pagerduty.com/culture/blameless/](https://postmortems.pagerduty.com/culture/blameless/) or [https://archive.ph/sfF9u](https://archive.ph/sfF9u)
